---
title: "Conservative vs. Liberal Brain?"
date: 2020-08-06
lead: Could brain patterns describe individuals' differing political perspectives?
tags:
  - "Neroscience"
categories:
  - "Academia"
---

In [this paper] published in 2007, Amodio et al, studied individuals' brains using electroencephalogram (EEG) and functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to examine whether there exist a neurobiological evidence reflecting the differences between conservatism and liberalism. [A similar paper] in 2011 also reported that there are substantial differences in the cognitive styles of liberals and conservatives on psychological measures.

> “we found that greater liberalism was associated with increased gray matter volume in the anterior cingulate cortex, whereas greater conservatism was associated with increased volume of the right amygdala…our findings extend previous observations that political attitudes reflect differences in self-regulatory conflict monitoring and recognition of emotional faces by showing that such attitudes are reflected in human brain structure." - Kanai et al, 2011

Basically these scientists claimed that these manifest attitudes of political liberalism versus conservatism (namely the conservatives more cautious while the liberals more audacious) can be traced biologically.

The empirical work done by these researchers was based on past behavioral studies that collectively suggested conservatives to be more structured and persistent in their decision making approaches, whereas liberals show higher tolerance of ambiguity and complexity, as well as openness to new experiences. 

Within the boundaries of these descriptions, the scientists hypothesized that there would be specific distinctions in the neuro-cognitive mechanisms involved in self-regulation/conflict monitoring, thus reflecting the differing political orientations.

What Amodio et al did to test this was to examine the structure (anterior cingulate cortex, or ACC —important for one’s emotion and cognitive control) and activity (the [ERN] and [N2] event-related potential components which are linked to one’s ability for attention and inhibition) of the participants' brains while undergoing the “go/no-go” task, which supposedly induces a conflict/mismatch monitoring process.

In general, the results were consistent with the researchers’ expectations that these brain activities strongly correlated with individuals’ political orientations. Specifically, a liberal political attitude was associated with significantly greater ern amplitude and acc activity when response inhibition was required; conversely, a more conservative attitude revealed less of the conflict-related neural activity.

The study is unique in that it demonstrated a quasi- neurocognitive correlates for individuals’ differing political ideologies by linking them to the brain’s mechanisms for self-regulation; nevertheless, whether the link between these “constructs” of political psychology and brain’s activities is a robust one is a matter that warrants more research.

**First, if these results were truly reflective of the two differing thinking patterns— so what? In other words, how can we make practical use of these data other than attributing them to the manifest behavioral/personality stereotypes**

Certainly, the ambition of cognitive science is to search for natural evidence in order to model and validate human behavior and experience. But what will this type of research thinking eventually translate into? Is it so that we could righteously categorize conservatives as more “religious”, “meticulous”, or “emotional” and liberals as more “skeptical”, “willing to take risks” or “rational”? Not to even mention that science is run by humans, as well as the whole reproducibility crisis in neuroimaging (or just science in general) studies only to show that the best tool out there is still very limited.

Of course, we shouldn’t just throw our hands up and give up on neuroscience. Actuallly, reverse inference doesn’t necessarily have to be a “fallacy”, per se. According to russell poldrack, “reverse inference can be a very useful strategy, especially if it is based on real data (such as the meta-analytic maps of from Yarkoni et al., 2011) rather than on an informal reading of the literature.”

What I’m saying is that **studying feathers does not explain flight**. In research, it is necessary to satisfy all [three levels of analysis]: the why (problem), the what (rules), and the how (physical).

One of the weaknesses of this paper is that they took the apparently differing brain patterns (vs. Evidence) and generated huge claims about there being a basis for political attitudes without carefully accounting for a plethora of potential variables that may be at play including socioeconomic and personal factors (political affiliation is a choice, isn’t it?) or just the fact that my brain is intrinsically different from your brain. Further experiments can be done in attempt to reproduce the results in different countries with disparate political landscapes and history versus those of america.

[this paper]: https://www.nature.com/articles/nn1979
[A similar paper]: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0960982211002892
[ERN]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Error-related_negativity
[N2]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/N200_(neuroscience)
[three levels of analysis]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/David_Marr_(neuroscientist)


