---
title: "How to Build Your Own Website Using Hugo, GitHub, and Netlify"
lead: So...I finally managed to build a blog using Hugo, GitHub and Netlify!
date: 2022-04-22
tags:
  - "Development"
  - "Tutorial"
---

Here are 5 simple steps to creating your own website using [Hugo], GitHub and Netlify on a Mac. This tutorial assumes that you have the following: 1) [GitHub account], 2) [Git], and 3) [Netlify]

## Step 1 Install necessary packages and programs

Open terminal, and follow instructions on the official documentations to install the pacakge manager [Homebrew]. Once you have sucessfully installed Hombrew, type: "brew install hugo" in your terminal.

```
brew install hugo
```
Type "which hugo" to check if it has been sucessfully installed. Type "hugo version" to check its version. 

## Step 2 Create a new site

On your terminal, navigate to the folder where you wish to store your website in. To do this you could first check where you are by typing "pwd", then simply type "cd" to change to the desired location. Then create a new site by typing "hugo new site [insert_your_site_name_here]". For example:

```
hugo new site anotherblog
```
This generates a static site folder named "blog" inside my home directory.

## Step 3 Pick a theme and use it

Choose a [hugo theme]. Navigate to its GitHub Repo by clicking the "Download" button. These themes usually come with a README file that instructs you the best way to install the theme, e.g. using `git clone` or `git submodule add`. The theme I am using is called Mainroad.

On Terminal, navigate to the root directory of the site you've created (e.g. type "cd anotherblog"). Once you are inside, copy and paste the link copied from Github and install the theme by running `git submodule add [github link to the theme]`. For me, it looked like the following:

```
git submodule add https://github.com/vimux/mainroad.git themes/mainroad
```

Once it is installed, use any source code editor, e.g. Atom or Visual Studio Code to open and make changes to the hugo site ("anotherblog") you have created just now. You should see the default folders including `archetypes`, `content`, `static`, etc. Importantly, you should see the theme you have downloaded in the `themes` folder. Then click on the `config.toml` file, and type the name of your theme:

```
theme = "mainroad"
```

You may preview the site locally by running:

```
hugo server
```
You should see that the web server is available at //localhost:1313/. Copy and paste it into your brower to preview.

You may create a post or do whatever you’d like to your new site. You could follow the `exampleSite` included in the `themes/mainroad` folder. For example, try copying the `about.md` file and paste it inside the `content` folder. You should see an “About” page on the server.

## Step 4 Link your site to GitHub.

Before committing and pushing the changes to Github, create a submodule path in `.gitmodules`. In the home directory of your site, simply click create new file, and name it `.gitmodules`. Inside my `.gitmodules` file looks like this:

This is an important step because it creates a mapping reference to the source repository, which will later allow a successful deployment via Netlify. For more information see this [post] on Stack Overflow.

```
[submodule "themes/mainroad"]
    path = themes/mainroad
    url = https://github.com/Vimux/Mainroad.git
```

Go to your GitHub account, and create a repository with a name you want. Then follow instructions on GitHub to link the repository to the local folder. Essentially, you want to push your hugo site to the Github repository. Below are some quick keys I use to track the changes I have made, commmit them and push them onto the GitHub repository.

```
Git init
Git remote add origin [your site on GitHub]
Git status
Git add .
Git commit -m “changes made first time”
Git push origin master
```


[GitHub account]: https://github.com/
[Git]: https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2/Getting-Started-Installing-Git
[Netlify]: https://www.netlify.com/
[Hugo]:https://gohugo.io/documentation/
[Homebrew]: https://brew.sh/
[hugo theme]: https://themes.gohugo.io/
[post]:https://stackoverflow.com/questions/53625208/failing-to-deploy-website-on-netlify-when-trying-to-use-alternate-hexo-theme