---
title: "Avatars in Augmented Reality: Bridging the Virtual and the Real?"
lead: The impact of an augmented reality avatar on our behavior, as well as its ethical implications.
thumbnail: /img/teaser.jpg
authorbox: true
sidebar: true
categories:
    - "Academia"
tags:
    - "Posts"
    - "Academia"
    - "CHI2022"
    - "Human-Computer Interaction"
---

Below is a conversation with Shu-Ting Lin.

*Augmented reality (AR) technology integrates virtual elements in the users’ physical surroundings and provides an interactive experience that enhances how they perceive reality. In recent years, AR has gained massive attention and made a real impact across multiple industries. As such, the use of AR and its influence on our society have become one of the most popular topics in recent years. The technology raises questions on what is considered an appropriate boundary between the virtual and the real, as well as solutions to related ethical issues. In this Interview with Ann Huang, a researcher in the field of cognitive science, we glean insight into AR-Avatar research, as well as her opinions on the ethical implications related to cognitive research in AR.*

**Q: Hello, I’m happy to have you here, what should I call you?**
Ann: Hi, thanks for having me here! My name is Ann.

**Q: Great! Ann. Would you like to introduce yourself briefly?**
Ann: Sure. I was born and raised in Taiwan but moved to the USA when I was 13. I obtained my Bachelor’s degree in the US. Afterwards I went on to pursue a MSc in Neuro-Cognitive Psychology at LMU Munich, Germany. While getting my masters I also worked at the LMU Institute for Informatics as a research assistant. I obtained my MSc degree in summer 2021 and now I am pursuing a PhD at Uni Osnabrück Institute for Cognitive Science.

**Q: It sounds like you have had rich international life experiences and great interest in your major. May I ask, what motivated you to dedicate yourself to studying cognitive science?**

Ann: I have always been interested in neuroscience. The human brain fascinates me– I think it’s like the “final frontier” in science where there are still many unknowns and challenges to be solved. Cognitive science is an interdisciplinary field covering many domains including biology, computer science, artificial intelligence and philosophy. Given my past experiences in neuroscience, psychology and human-computer interaction, I think pursuing a cognitive science degree is suitable for me. Currently, I am working on a project that seeks to understand how we interact with our surroundings with others and make joint decisions about the world around us. I use computational modeling and neurophysiological data to answer my research questions. In the future I hope to also understand how these cognitive principles or computational models could be applied to artificial agents, i.e. robots, intelligent avatars.

**Q: I’m with you on that. This scientific field holds much space for further exploration and development. Since you mentioned artificial agents, I would like to talk about your paper: Proxemics for Human-Agent Interaction in Augmented Reality which has been accepted recently for the 2022 ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. Could you tell me more about it, what was your research about?**

Ann: Sure. As the title suggests, this project is about how human users interact with artificial human-like agents in an AR system, i.e. Microsoft HoloLens 2. More specifically, we wanted to understand whether these virtual agents with social characteristics occupy a personal space, and how do users decide to interact with these virtual agents.

I conducted an experiment where participants interacted with six virtual agents (two males, two females, a humanoid robot, and a pillar) in an AR art gallery scenario. Participants were asked to approach the virtual agents ) to ask for directions. Interestingly, we found that participants respected the agents’ personal space and modulated interpersonal distances according to the virtual human-like agents’ perceived gender. Overall, people kept a larger distance from the male-looking human avatar compared to the rest.

**Q:  Your research is obviously very important to further development in AR application. It’s super interesting to see the relationship between humans and AR Avatar. How come that you decided to research AR Avatar with respect to cognitive science?**
Ann: I actually didn’t really make that decision :p (although yes, I agree that perception of these virtual agents has lots of connection with human cognition). This AR-avatar project was an opportunity afforded to me while working at the media informatics lab. The project itself actually intersected psychology and human-computer interaction (HCI) and less with cognitive science.

I think one important reason cognitive scientists use these AR/VR/XR systems is that they  can provide a highly realistic and persuasive context such that it allows a sufficient degree of ecological validity. Basically virtual environments give researchers precise control over the experiment conditions, and the results are also more generalizable to the real-world.  For example, some of my colleagues are using human-like avatars in an immersive VR environment to investigate how people perceive faces, which is harder to study in real-life or just using plain 2D images of faces. People are also using AR/VR to study theories in cognitive science like embodied cognition to glean principles that could be applied to, for instance, human-robot interaction. 


**Q: I can totally imagine that it must have been an exciting study. It’s also impressive to see how you value AR application with respect to cognitive science. Now regarding your recent paper, I believe I’m not the first one to ask you ethical questions concerning  your research, especially that you and your team wanted to see how these agents occupy space or how users’ space collide with the virtual agents’ space the users’ personal space, and that the results of your study are similar to how we would react to individuals or objects in the real world. In terms of that, I’m keen to know what you think: How do humans perceive the AR Avatar in terms of interpersonal and social distance?**

Ann: Sure, this is a good question. Thinking in terms of my recent study, the way I understand this question is that the user’s interaction experience varies with the distance that they keep with the avatars.

I think an AR avatar could impact a user’s interpersonal distance in several ways. First, I think that imbuing these virtual agents with a body and a face also means creating a plausible scenario where their behaviors should adhere to social-spatial norms. So if they conflict with the physical surroundings, then it could cause discomfort in the users. For example, imagine an human avatar standing super close to the user without respect to the user’s personal space or somehow flying in the ceiling breaking the rules of physics. This is potentially going to reduce the user’s sense of presence and cause uncomfortable interaction experiences.


**Q: I can imagine that kind of uncomfort. In your opinion, are there any ethical issues that may perhaps be of concern?**
 
In my paper I wrote about how the results of the experiment could contribute to designing a comfortable pervasive AR experience. Essentially, a pervasive AR interface aims to be aware of and responsive to the user’s context (e.g. environment, affective state) such that it allows continuous access to information. Developments such as Mesh or Holoportation could soon be adapted for real-time communication; however, privacy could become a concern on this continuum. Respect for other people’s personal space becomes important when users attempt to teleport into each other’s space. Here, knowing what we know about how people keep distances – we could leverage this information to encourage positive social interaction.
 
Lastly, just like any other data, when we track distances that users keep with the avatars, we are tracking individual personal information. In simple research experiments, the data collected are stored anonymously and only for a limited amount of time, but not always so for tech companies. Therefore I think companies should protect user’s rights to privacy against any form of surveillance, and aim for only collecting and keeping necessary data for specific services that the users are asking for.

**Q: I agree with you. The users’ rights to privacy need to be highly concerned. Because human users are being increasingly exposed to interacting with avatars, it is then reasonable to ask: would an AR avatar bring more social isolation or connection?**

Ann: Interesting and highly relevant question! First, on the technical side I think this depends a lot on the avatar’s perceived realism as well as the users themselves. A human-like avatar that has a very realistic appearance could certainly invite more social interaction/engagements from the users even to the extent that they treat these digital humans as real companions. Therefore, I think it is imperative that we think about the design of these avatars in terms of their realism because they are certainly capable of bringing more social connection provided that they are intelligent enough. 

However, I think just because avatars are realistic looking doesn't necessarily imply meaningful social connection as we know in the human-to-human sense. And I think this question relates to the role of AI in helping human loneliness, as we have seen in movies like Her or Ready Player One. Platforms like the Metaverse aim to bring people together through users’ virtual avatar representations but I’d be wary of it because if we rely more on these virtual platforms, there could be more social isolation due to deprivation in genuine physical human-human connection (I mean, I cannot even in the slightest bit handle all these Zoom meetings anymore!). I believe genuine and meaningful social connections result from people interacting with each other physically rather than virtually. There is just something so special seeing each other face-to-face!

**Q: For sure! I’m excited about the upcoming transformation of our social connection. Another benefit of AR is to say that this technology can enhance our physical world. However, it could also confuse human’s cognition and awareness in some cases. For instance, most of the users in your experiment  unconsciously walk around AR avatars to see the art exhibits behind them instead of walking through them, even though they know that these avatars are virtual. What would you say, in what terms would AR expand or disturb our consciousness and enhance or damage our reality?**

Ann: As mentioned before, I think it is important to think about the perceived realism of these avatars— how real should they be? There have also been interesting research questions asked, e.g. should Alexa (Amazon's cloud-based voice service) have a face and a body? It is important to address these because they carry ethical implications. I think these digital representations via AR/MR systems could become so real to the extent that users cannot distinguish them from the physical world. Perhaps adults are aware of these representations being virtual; however, to children or young teenagers it might not be so. Therefore, with regards to the virtual interfaces, I think it is important that we begin thinking about the “ground truth” (what is real vs. not real). 

**Q: For that I’m sure everyone has its own definition. When it comes to realism of AR Avatars, there are not only human-like avatars but abstract Avatars such as a cylinder. The results show that people prefer a human-like avatar in your user test. However, when it comes to digital assistants, there are some people who believe it is supposed to be as humanized as possible, while others insist on developing abstract visualization. What is your view? Should virtual assistance particularly in AR be designed as humanized or abstract?**

Ann: This is a good question. There are many ways to “humanize” a virtual assistant, like implementing a human-like voice feedback, or providing it with a body and a face . But I think this depends on the use-cases.

I think using human-like avatars is certainly only fitting for specific use-cases. For example, I could imagine using these human-like avatars as assistants more in the entertainment or consumer industry. Like if I am in an art museum, it’d be nice to have a virtual intelligent human-like assistant that I could access via my smartphone  to guide my tour and answer any questions I have. However, in other use-cases, such as driving, I wouldn’t suggest using human-like agents as personalized assistants because they could cause distractions.

**Q: I couldn’t agree more. To design the outlook of the avatars depending on different use-cases makes sense to me. A further ethical question of AR Avatar: do you think a successful AR Avatar would harm the relevant job market, e.g. replacing a human to work as a guide in a museum?**

Ann: It depends. Human-like avatars are useful because they are a more natural and intuitive interface to huaman users. In some cases, I believe using these virtual human agents could be useful. For example, there was a software/smartphone application developed during the COVID-19 pandemic that uses virtual human avatars to demonstrate how one should properly  wear personal protective equipment (PPE). This is a good example use-case as it seeks to not overwhelm the healthcare workers through using digital humans. Nevertheless, not all use cases require replacement of actual human workers. I think in some cases (e.g. tourism), it is still worthwhile to interact with an actual human being.

**Q: Thank you for sharing your fascinating study and opinions on ethical issues related to cognitive research in AR. Last but not the least, we know the rapid advancement of innovative technologies and applications  brings us both excitement but also anxiety of the unknown. Can you provide some advice as a cognitive scientist to people, how should we get along with the booming AR technology?**

Ann: Sure. I think I would like to encourage thinking more about the “human” aspect when we speak about “human-centered” computing or design. Much of the recent progress in technologies sometimes make me think that we are becoming more “AI-centered” ubiquitous computing rather than “human-centered.” Innovation in these technologies could develop in us an increased reliance on them. For instance, machine learning algorithms are powerful in improving our lives yet they could reinforce prejudice or fake news if not used carefully. Concerning this, HCI/AI researchers or even UX/UI designers should try to make these AI systems explainable and easy to use, as these applications are supposed to help us and not replace or harm our existing capabilities.

With regards to advancement in AR like realistic rendering and precise tracking, it is especially important that we pay attention to how they could change the way we perceive the world. Scientists and researchers should consider the implications of these applications– are they harming us or really helping us to become better people? What makes a human being a human being? Also, we should consider some people who may not adapt as well to the boom of these tech innovations, for example,  the elderly and children. We should also design systems that best fit their needs.  Lastly, in co-living and working with these technologies, I think we should not forget the little things that bring us happiness and joy, such as going out for a coffee with a friend :)
