---
title: Can a Community be Truly Inclusive?
date: 2022-05-06
authorbox: true
sidebar: true
categories:
    - "Late night thoughts"
    - "Tweets"
tags:
    - "Posts"
    - "Religion"
---

{{< tweet 1522257876214898695 >}} 

This week I had the honor of attending and presenting at CHI 2022. What a week! In both the opening and closing keynotes, topics concerning culture, inclusivity, equity, justice, racism, and intersectionality were brought up. My favorite line was- “CHI is so US-centric. I wish we would have a little more understanding of how these issues (racism, equity, culture, etc) look in other parts of the world.” These discussions echoed within me and I’ve been thinking about these matters for as long as I could remember (especially applying to the context of faith-based communities).

I think no one is genuinely inclusive i.e., everyone is exclusive. For example, a church community that claims they are truly welcoming of anyone is inherently professing that their community is built on the assumption that they are open to anyone who so wills to join. However, one can’t argue that they’re genuinely inclusive because by saying this they make themselves not inclusive. This is the same with any other communities.

Therefore, the question comes down to choice. And thinking a little further, we could ask what is our choice governed by? Is it a set of traditions, customs or rules we simply follow (in which case we follow blindly) or truly convictions from our hearts?

I think eventually everyone wants the same thing- they want to fit in, be useful, love and be loved. For example, for a while I wasn’t (still haven’t been) quite into this church community/life I’ve been part of since my whole life due to a set of circumstances or sometimes simply due to frequent relocations between and within countries. For some reason, I just didn’t feel I was needed or loved, even. I just couldn’t quite find my own people who are perhaps as weird as I am i.e., thinking the same way as I do, being a little more ambitious and driven in pursuing and experiencing the worldly things. Therefore, I chose to focus on academic work, proactively make friends and recently also decided to join another community. I’ve been learning a lot from interacting with various perspectives, most of all I feel a lot more comfortable and am happier living this way for now.

At any rate, I think about this a lot- though no community is genuinely inclusive, **“How could we still create a safe space for uncomfortable but much needed conversations? We should strive to be gentle and understanding in the spirit of love and respect.”** I agree with this spoken word from the keynote a lot. I think many times church members avoid hard conversations, but I see this as an urgent need amongst us today. Hard questions and conversations will lead to mutual understanding. Further, if a community does not strive to understand what it means to be a human and the natrual struggles associate with it, they are merely being preachy without much reality. I mean, where is the “human-centered” part of the computing, and where is the “humanity” in the ministry?