---
title: Being Critical is not the Same as Critical Thinking
date: 2022-07-17
authorbox: true
sidebar: true
tags:
    - "Posts"
    - "Late night thoughts"
---

I don't know about you, but sometimes I'd like to step outside of echo chambers and see what other poeple with seemingly disimliar views have to say.

So today I came across this video.

{{< youtube 8RV2AfWKwGo >}}

To be frank, I could kind of understand where he is coming from, even relate to his struggle; however, I neither agree or disagree with the content, and only have one comment about it:

> “Being critical is not the same as critical thinking.” Critical thinking is an active process by which you evaluate your own thinking and judgement from a purely objective standpoint. Being critical is this inclination to find fault, blame and severly judge others.

I don’t know who needs to hear this, but this is a quote that really helps and encourages me through the years, especially those after the [FTTA]:

> “It is not the strength of your faith but the object of your faith that actually saves you. Strong faith in a weak branch is fatally inferior to weak faith in a strong branch. ” ― Timothy Keller, *The Reason for God: Belief in an Age of Skepticism*

Given my natural, stubborn-ass personality which likes to find out the reason behind anything and everything, I don’t think I’ll stop being a hot mess struggling with faith-related things anytime soon…but somehow these types of videos with opposing views, doubts, skepticism, etc. do not depress me but rather really reminded and encouraged me to go pray and struggle with God Himself.

He seems like a person who puts his whole heart into something and doesn’t settle for less, thus when something seems to be off intuitively, he is shaken to the core, and this is **me, too**, honestly. I admire his spirit of having a critical lens about things; nevertheless, being critical is just not the same as critical thinking. We need more shepherds and teachers to listen and care for these ones.

These days, I just feel that what we need is to learn to listen to one another. I don't agree being too simplistic in our thinking (see my previous post on [What is Simplicity]), or just avoiding conflict in the name of "keeping the oneness". This is because I think a good conflict/debate could be helpful in dissecting one's own thinking process and exposing the motive behind the reasoning. But I also don’t agree with the opposite extreme where people are simply critical and making severe judgments and claims about things.

Lastly, I just want to say that I could understand his struggle to a certain extent. There is really no judgment there, because I could totally sympathize with how confusing everything is at times, and sometimes cancelling others is the way to process grief. I could bet you that he most probably wants a visit from the members in the local churches, as well as someone who would simply listen to what he has to say. However, I am aware that humans are limited creatures; we are limited by time and space and could only do so much at times. Thereofore, our best solution might just be going to the Lord Himself. Recently I've also learned to go to others (no need to be in the local churches either) who have had similar experiences and are willing to listen to you **AND** doesn't just complain or be sad with you, but rather turn these complaints into prayers and actions together.


Here are some stanzas from a [hymn] written by Witness Lee himself:

> Through the church’s degradation, \
Saints this office desolate; \
Through the weakness of their spirits \
Preaching doth predominate.

> Most are leaning on the message \
And the preaching emphasize, \
Yet neglect the priestly praying \
And their spirits’ exercise.

One thing worth thinking about, as Christians are we the ones who are just "leaning on the message" and "emphasize the preaching"?

Finally here is again a quote by Tim Keller:

> “To be loved but not known is comforting but superficial. To be known and not loved is our greatest fear. But to be fully known and truly loved is, well, a lot like being loved by God. It is what we need more than anything. It liberates us from pretense, humbles us out of our self-righteousness, and fortifies us for any difficulty life can throw at us.” ― Timothy Keller

[FTTA]: https://www.ftta.org/
[hymn]: http://www.witness-lee-hymns.org/hymns/H0848.html
[What is Simplicity]: https://anotherblog.netlify.app/posts/2022-03-15/